MS. OF THE MARQUIS OF BATH (LONGLEAT) 
In the same yere after that kyng Richard hadde resigned in the Toure of London ffro thense he was ledde unto the castell of Leedys in Kent. And there he abood a while and ffro thense he was leed to the castell of pountfret in the northe countre and soon aftir he came thethir he dyed: and whan the kyng wyst that he was deed he lett ordyne a lyttir and clothed his body in a cheste and he was bawmid and servyd in lynnyn clothe with his vysage lyeing opene. And soo brought to London wt torche light byrnyng as ought to his astate unto seynt poules and there his enterment was holdyn wt alle the solempnyte of servis that myght be doon. And ffro seynt poules he was brought into the abbey of Westminster and ther he had his deryges and masses wt great solempnyte. And ffro W estmynster he was caaryed to the ffreares of langlee. And ther hee was buryd. In the same yeare came the Emperoure of Constantynoble withe meny lordes and knyghtes in to England. And the king recevyd hyme and his lordes right worthely and here he and all his many laie at the kynges costes. And in the same yere came dame Jane Duchesse of Bryteigne into England, and landyd at ffalmouthe in Cornewall. And she was brought to the citee of Wynchestre.
And ffourthe witte she was weddyd ther unto kyng henry in the abbey of seynt Roeethynes in Wynchestre: and ffro thense she was brought to London. And there the maire and the aldremen recevyd her in the mooste worthie wyse that they coulde: and roode wt hir through London to Westminster : and there she was crownyd quene   and there the kynge made a solem p ff east in the worshipe of hir and all the straungers that came withe hir. In the same yere Sir Richard Scrope Archibishope of Yorke and the lorde Mowbrey Marshall of Englande arysen in the northe countrie and gatherd a greet noumbr of pepull ayenste the king. And the king knowing hereof ordynyd his hooste and went northe ward in all the hast that he myght and mette wt hym at yorke. And there were thies too lordes take and brought to the kyng and there juggement was gevyn that bothe there heedes shoulde be smytten of by cause of there untrow cause that they purposyd them on. 
And in the same yere the xxixth daye of auguste dyed kyng henry the ffyfte in the Citie of Parres. And ffrome therice wt all servis belongyng unto hyme through evirry goode citie and towne he was brought unto Caleys and soo brought into England. And a gaynst his commyng to London the mair and the alder.men and the most partie of all the comones clothed all in blake mett wt hyme upon the blake heethe and in Southwark ther cam all the religioues with ther crosses and brought his boddie unto seynt poules. And ther he had such solempnyte servis as belongyd to his astate and fro thence all the citee wt ryght hevye hartes went upon ffoot to Westminster wt his boddye and there he was beryed bisydes seynt Edwards shryne the vij day of November in the year of our lorde gode (M)CCCC xxij. Of whose soule Jesu ffor his pittye have mercye and grace. 
This yer was gret scarcitie of hey and grete derth of corn and grevous penury reigning among the peple.  
This yer the cardynall, duke of york, Archebisshop york, the Erle Stafford, the Erle of Ewe and oper lordes yeden over to Caleis for the entrete of peas. And this yer pe mair provided full graciously and ordeyned such plenty of whete and greyn that the peple were well comforted. 
This yere the Erle Huntingdon wan many tounes castels and abbeys at Guyan in short space  also pis yer the parliament was hold in London. And emoved after cristemas to Redyng. In the which parliament was ordeyned that the lumbardes shuld goo to host for VI I yer: and that all man er alienes enherite in the land shuld yerely pay a tribute to the kyng and that the see shuld be kept for enymyes which ordennces toke noon effect. And the ffriday the iij day of J uyn oon Richard Wych preist was brent at Toure Hille for Eresy enndited upon hym. And pe peple in g-reet multitude held hvm a seint. This yer the iiij day of Novembr continuyng the seid parly.ment the duke of Orlyaunce passed from London upon the poyntment of his deliveraunce toward ffraunce.  Also the same yere was the feet of armes doon in Smythfeld betwene Sir Richard Wodevyle and a knyght of Spayn. And the xvi day of may the duke of yorke wt a greet power roode jJUrgh the citee toward ffraunce.
Also the Sonday xxij day of Jull oon maisstr Roger denounced at powles crosse, the poyntes of expiring the kings deth and showed ther many marvelous craftes. 
Item upon seint Anne day fol_owyng dame alianore cobham Duches of Gloucestr was endited of treson for the same cause. 
Item the same yer upon seint Edwards day the xxiij day of Octobr in chesing of the mair dept Robert Clopton wer at Guyldhall endited of pety treson by the avyse of the Aldrernen or they departed out of the hall and comyt to newgate .erto abide the kings grace because they made a newe proclamacion upon Rauf holond aldreman aftr that the same Robert Clopton was presented mair.This yere the Monday the xiiij day of novembr contynuyng the seid parliament the seid duches of Gloucestre yede with a tapre brennyng in her hand purgh a part of the cite<.: which was enjoyned to her by the chirche for penaunce: that is to wite she yede the same day from Powles to Charyngcros, the Wednesday from the Swan in Thamestrete unto crichirch, the fr.day from powles wharf thurgh chepe to sent michel in cornhill. Item the Saterday folowyng wer many lordes atte Gild halle and many Jugges and ther wer brought afore theym for the seid expiring of the kings deth the said maistr Roger and maistr John Humme.  And the seid maistr John Humme was quyt and the seid maistr Roger was jugged the same day by the ver.dite yeuyng of an enquest and hanged drawen and quartered. And this yer the xxx day of J anyver was a feet of arm es doon in Smythfeld betwene a knyght of Aragon and John Asteley squyer which John for his deed doyng was made knight in the said feld by the kyngs handes forthwith. 
Item this yer on our lady Eve of Assumpcion be ganne the greet pardone atte Kings college of Eton. This yer the citee of Norwich was grevously hurt for a dis.cension moved betwene the citezons pere, and an abbot or a priour.
 Itern this yere the duke of Somerset wt a grete power ordenance and stuff moustred at portesmouth diverse tymes and might not have redy passage which was grevous to the contree. 

Item the moneth of July the dukes Bro per of Bretaigne cam to England. This yer was found be a mason in the oold werk of the Guyldhall in london the first day of Octobr a greet portion of money whereof was greet multitude of pens wherof xxd weyed an unce. Item the same yere was a comyssion sued for the citee of the new london whiche was dept a newe chartre and the comones wer greetly agreved therwith.  
Item pe iii day afore cristemas deyed Sir John cornewall knight and lyeth buryed atte blak ffreres. 
Item pis yer dyed in the eend of may the seid duke of Somerset which was a full worthy werreour. 
Item this yer atte begynnyng of may was ordeined that the open marcates on the Sonday wer for doon. 
Item this yer was at seint albons the last of Juyn a play of Eglemour and Degrebelle. 
Item the moneth of August was a play at Bermonsey of a knight cleped ffiorence.  Item the Friday the iijth day of august noon Thomas Kerver of Redying gentilman was jugged to be drawn hanged and quartered for a traytor for seyeng of thees wordes and the same day he was drawe thurgh the citee of london ffrom the tour unto the Tybourn and as the roop was on his nek his chartre cam from the Kyng and he was saved and cam agen on horsbak purgh the citee wt glad chier. 

Item this yer dyed the Bisshop of Caunterbory and pan the Bisshop of Bath Chaunceller of pis lond was made Bisshopp of cauntorbury and occupied per with JJe office of chauncellor.

Item this yer wer made iij dukes pt is to wite jJe erle huntingdon was made duke of Excester the Erle Stafford Duk of Bukingham and the erle of Warrewyk w made Duk of Warrewyk. 
This yer the vj day of Novembr the Erle of Suffolk rode thurgh Chepe wt other diverse enbassiatores for mariage to be hadde for the king wh a notable power wt hors trapped and chares ladyes and gentiles in the moost joyull and costeous divyse that ever was seyn in such caas. 
Item upon candelmas eve powles steple was sodenly on fire and contynued brennyng iij houres but it was holpon and quenched wt venegre. 

Item the thursday the xviij day of ffeverer was the day of bataill assigned in Smythfeld betwene Thomas ffitzGerot priour of the order of Seint John Jerusalem in Irland appellant and Sir James Erle of Ormond defendaunt on the poynt of treson and the was greet ordenannce of Scaffold and greet nombr of peple gadered as ever was seyn afore in such caas. And the hertes of the comones in substaunce wer wt pe Erle: And a geinst the seid priour. And yet ther was noo batiell doon for the king toke it unto his hands and soo the king and his counseill wold not suffre the Bateill to be hadde. And so noo part appered and greet cost lost.
Item the thursday suyng began a noper parliament and was holden at Westminster and at Estre folowyng hit was prolonged. 
Item the ffryday the ix day of Aprill the Quene cam into England from hemirshen and londed at iiij afternoon . at portesmouth and the sonday folewyn was made greet joy of her co.yng and the belles wer rong and Te deum sung in every Chirche solempny. 
Item the thursday after the Quene was wedded at Suthwerk beside portesmouth. And the first day of May beganne pe lordes to ryde ageinst her and soo after (she) was ledde and conveied in this land from place to place be lord aftr lord att severall tymes wt notable power and greet array. 
Item the ffriday the xxviij day of May the Queen cam from Eltham unto the blak heeth and ther the mair of london with alle the aldremen and comens in costeous aray and shee in a chare richely dight and xxj chares folowyng wt ladies and gentiles in riche array and conveyed her unto the Tour of london and the was the king present and resceyved her. And the leverey of the citee was blew gownes embrawded and reed hoodes and on the morowe she cam purgh the citee unto Westminster in a litier of white cloth of gold and she in the same array sitting and ij stedes trapped in the same bar the same littier and a canape of the same sorte born over her heed wt iiij knights and all lordes knightes and squyeres and other conveyed her and in all places of the citee was made as costeous ar_ray as ever was seyn afore. 
Item the sonday morn folowyng she was crouned at West.minster and p wer roiall justes made and upon midsomer and seint petre even folowyng was made pe royallest wacche pt ever was seyn ther a fore and the King the queen and lordes wer present the same evenes in the citee. 
Item atte begynnyng of July com Enbassiators for tretee of eis and tar ed her ii" wekes and had reet chier.
This yer the v day of aprill eended the seid parliament. Item the xv day of May began a greet counseill and the kyng lay atte Tour. And V and at Smythfeld wer proposed divers feets and chalenges and justes to be doon of royalte in honour of the seid coronacion. Also the same moneth wer made manye halpens at Tour. And the Bastard of Scales was slayn in fletestrete. And the same moneth during was greet wacch in the citee kept wt men of armes. But the cause werfor that hit was the peple knew not. 

Item the ffriday the first day of July powles chirch was suspect and the v da folow no-halowed ageyn.This yer the Tewesday the last day of Janyvere was the Bataill in Smythfeld betwene an armerer in ffletestrete which was holden a good man of werr and his servant upon Treson that he appeled his maistr and the same servaunt slewe per his maistr full vengeiably and forth with the seid armorer hede was smyten of and set upon london Brigge and his body cast upon ffyketts ffelds and afterwards bury hit atte sute of his freendes in cristen buryelles.  
Item the monday the xiij :t day of ffeverey be gan pe parlia.ment at Bury and the lordes rood thedir wt greet power as they shuld have riden to werr and all the peple of the contrees aboute wer secretly commanded to wacch for saufte of the kings persone. 
Item the monday dept shrovemonday folewyng the xxi day of ffeverer the duke of Gloucestre was arrested at Bury pe kyng _per present and diverse of his knights squyers and Gentiles taken in diverse costs and comyt to severall prisons of treson and the iii day folowyng the same duke deyed for hevynes and pan his body conveied from } ens and buryed at sent Albons. And forthwith the parliament was ffinished whereof the comones of the land merveilled greetly and wer hevy for the deth of the seid duke which hadde full pryncely and prudently kept this lond and pe peple in good rule peas and governaunce all the nonnage of the king. 
Item the Sonday the xv day of may Sir Reignold Pecok Bisshop of seint Asse preched at Powles crosse and declared that Bisshops wer not bound to preche. 
Item the moneth aprill deyed henry cardinal Bisshop of Wyn.chestre and lieth buried at Wynchestre. 
Item the xiiij day of J uyn the enbassiatres for tretye of theas cam thurgh the citee of london and were conveyed roially unto the king with many lordes and greet peple.
Item the xij day of July wer reigned and dampned atte Barre at Westminster Sir Roger Chamberleyn knight Sir Artoys Son to the seid duke of Gloucestre and oon Myddelton Gentilman upon treson of which rule the peple grucched and wer hevy. And the seconday folowyng _pe seid Sir Roger Artoys Middel. ton and oon Herberd Squyer and Richard Nedam mercer of london servauntes to the seide duke weren drawe from the kings Bench in Suthwerk thurgh Chepe unto the Tyborne. And they lay everyman on the hurdelles in doubletts of velvet. And pe seide Artoys held a crosse of gold between his manacles. And evermore they praied the peple to pray for them as pey wer gilt.less of any treson which sight was fully hevy to the comones and the seid enbassiatores present this tyme. And whan thise men ,:ver brought to the Galowes they wer hanged all v persons and per with was their chartres   shewed pt the king hadde pardoned hem and sodenly the ropes smyten a sondre and they on lyve and cam a gen purgh the citee t anking god and the king of pt grace. 
Item the ij day of August the seid enbassiators rood agen JJurgh the cite toward ffrance whoose names weren J,e Bastard of Orlyaunce and the Bastard of seint poule. 
Item the v day of august deyed the seid duke of Excester and this yer was right plenteuaus of all maner cornes and frute and This yer a noon after lamesse the king graunted to the seid Erle of Ormond by the meanes and labour of the maistr of sent Thomas of Akreem london the chartre of the seid appell and the treson that was surmetted upon him was proved openly entrewe and fa lsly ymagined. I tern the same time the Bisshop of Norwich and maister Adam moleyns pryvee seell and other roden into ffraunce at greet costes of pis realme to conclude for peas.  Item a noon after the ffrenssh men leyden sege to sent J ulyan de Maunce in Aungeoy and in short time hit was yolden to the ffrensshmen and in short tyme a power was ordeyned to passe into ffraunce. 
Item the monday in Estre weke which was the day of the annunciation of our lady Stevenhith Peche Brak and the Thames cam in at popeler and drenched many houses and did greet harme to the contree.
 Item the ij day of Juyn the Erle of Suffolk was made duke of Suffolk at Westminster and Sir Richard Wodevyle was made Baron and lord of Ryvers and Sir John Stoorton tresourer of the kings hous was made'Baron of Stoorton. 
Item the drapers and taillours of london made greet sute upon a truce betwene them but the taillors optened and recovered.
Item the xxviii day of august the duk of norffolk was comanded to the tour of london wher he was prisoned vi dayes and par. hadde his discharge from the king and was delivered. 
Item the moneth of septembre the king rode to York at which tyme the Scottes had issued into the English marches and brent and dyd moch harme and afterward as cowardes knowyng of pe kynges comyng stale home agein and filed into Scotlond and after them issued a greet power into pe land of Englisshemen of the marches and brent and slewe in Scotlond and wolde have distroied that land but they wer reconntred and comaunded by the king to ceas and soo cam ageyn. And pan the Scots of sotell ymaginacion rosen agein. And pan Sir H enre percy and many other Gentiles pursued upon theym and sodenly they wer betrapped and taken in a mire ground which was a greet hevynes to the kin and a revous hurt to is land. And a noon after the Erle of Salesbury brent greet part of the marches of Scotland and toke many prisoners and greet store of their catell. This yere the xiij day of ffeverer began the parliament at Westminster and John Say was made speker perof and pan appered every night in the west from vj of pe hour unto viij a lennyng   sterr whereof pe peple merveyled and wondred and the xxx day of may the same parliament was prolonged and proroged to Wynchestre. 
Item the same moneth of may oon Robert of Caan maryner of the west con tree   toke a fore the toun of hampton wt xiiij shippes in his company Cviij shippes of enemyes and slewe and toke in theym moche peple be grace and fortune. Item the parliament soo prorogecl began at Wynchestre the xvi of J uyn and the comones of the parliament long tyme wold not accord upon ony act to be made because they wold that the king shuld resume his demaynes and lyve upon his right and enheritaunce and so as a king roiail of power to regne upon his peple.  But the king in no wise as was seid wold resume his demaynes and soo the wednesday the xvj day of July the said parliament was desolved. 
Item the same tyme the ffrensshmen gate pount large and vernon in perch and many other strong tov.,nes and castels in ffraunce   and slewe and token moche englissh peple and the lord ffauconberge and meny oper Gentiles wer take prisoner and the Scotts also the same tyme robbed, brent and slew in pe north mervelously and hevy to wite. Howe be hit oon Sir William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk havyng than aboute the king an the rule and the governaunce of this land was wondrely in the comon voys,of pe peple noysed and disclaundred to be pe meene and causer of the seid hurtes and losse taken by the seid ffrensshmen and scottes and yet ye king wold not take the seid resumpcion. This yer beganne anoper parliament in Je moneth of novembre and ordennance was made perfor atte Tour of london but hit was holden at ffrere precheours wtyn Ludgate. And after hit was removed unto Westminster and atte begynning of the parlia.ment cam woord pt the citee of Roon was taken and yolden  up to J,e ffrenssh kyng and soo hit was and per were taken prisoner the duke of Somerset the lorde Talbot which is Erle of Shroves.bury the lord sone Bergevenny the lord Roos the Erles second sone of Ormond and many oper knightes squyers and Gentiles and all the grettest and chief stuff of werre and ordenannce that king henry the V. hadde provided be his pollecy for the defence of Normandy and getyng of his conquest in ffraunce. And furthwt wer yolden to }>e seid ffrenssh king many oper greet citees and castels and anoon upon that was made over to Calais a greet power of Sowdyers for to kepe that place and Guynes and pe marches ther and elles all hadde be goten which was a greet cost to the comones of london ffor they ffoond over pe   sowdeors so that every person that was of any reputacion was sett and tasked to geve perto a parcell of his goodes.   Item a noon folowyng wer many other taskes and loones leveed of the peple be sotell and straunge meanes. And open werre was cryed wi fflaundres and Scotland. And a noon after peas wt them. So p was noo good rule nor stablenes (was) at that tyme to greet discomfort and hevynes of the peple. And the comones of the parliament laboured evermore that the king shulcl admit and resceyve to have his resumpcion. Item the ffriday the ix day of Janyver the Bisshop of Chy.chester pryve seall was sleyn and beheded at Chichestr the strenght of the comones. 
Item the moneth of J anyver oon calling hym self Queen of the feyre yede into Kent and Essex and did noon oppression nor hurt to any persone.  
Item the xxij day of Janyver beganne the parliament agen at Westminster and pe iiij day after the seid Duk of Suffolk was in purpose to have departed from the king and to have goon to the castell of Walyngford because the cominaltie of the land hadde him in greet suspect and blame of all pe said losses and hurtes and soo to have excused him self. And a greet power of peple wer assigned to have conveyed hym from Westminster to the said castell for his suretee and defence and as he shuld have passed the comones of the parliament hadde laboured in such wyse that he was comyt to the Tour of london. 
Item the same tyme was greet wacche aboute the kynge and in the citee of london every nyght. And the peple wer in doute and feer what shuld fall for the lordes corn to Westminster and to the parliament wt greet power as men of werr. Item the same tyme a man was jugged and hanged and drawen for woordes that he said ageinst the rule of the lordes.  Item the ix day of ffeverer oon callyng hymself William Blewberd which hadde laboured to have accompanyed a greet felawship for to have hadde a rule among the lordes was drawe purgh the citee and hanged. 
Item the same tyme laye many sowdeours at portesmouth which shuld have passed over afore Cristemas and soor pilled and enpouered the contray.  And in the mean tyme the dolfyn and the kyng of Cecile the quenes £fader laboured in such wyse that they gate all normandy wtoute ony greet resistence and the erledome of Angeoy demayn which hadde be the olde enheritaunce and right evermore and tyme out of mynde of the kynges of Engeland. And than wer all pe Englisshmen dryven and sent oute from ffraunce N ormancly and Angeoy and cam into pis land in greet mysery and poverte be many companyes and felawships and yede into severall places of pe land to be enherite and to lyve upon the almes of the peple. But many of them drewe to theft and misrule and noyed sore the cominalte of pis land spirituell and temporell and many of _peym afterward hanged. 
Item the Wednesday the xxv day of ffeverer was greet wedering of raync and wynde and atte nyght the king's place at Eltham pe Quene beyng present per sodenly was on fire. 
And in this parliament the comones therof appeled and detect to pe kings highnes the seid duk of Suffolk being in pe tour as a prisoner of divers poyntes of treson  notwithstonding which appeel the king delivered be his prorogatif the same duke out of the tour at his large. And the xv day of March the same duk being at Westminster pryvely gate awey from thens and yede that nooman knewe whether. Where with the comones of this land wer agreved and certeyn of the seid duks men wer take in the nyght be wacchemen of the citee and comyt to the comptours but they wer delivered ageyn be write wtout tarieng. 
Item the Satirday the xxix day of March oon John Ramsey servaunt to a vynter in london was drawe   hanged and quartered be cause he seid london shall put pe kyng from his crown   and the monday folowyng the seid parliament was emoved to leycestre. 
Item the xxj day of aprill Queneburgh was asawted be ffrensshemen and almost goten. And in the mean tyme pe seid duk of Suffolk which hadde kept him at Est horp be side Bury yede to the see and had the Duke of Burgoyn saufconduct and when he was in the see betwene dovor and caleys in the ship called the Nicholas of the Tour  he was encountred be oper shippes and beheded and his body cast upon the sandes at Dovor and his heed pight upon a stake which deed was doon the first day of maij. 
Item the xij day of Juyn assembled atte Blake Heath beside london of men of Kent cc a greet peple well arraied. 
Item the same day cam the duk of Bokyngham and lord Ryvers into the citee wt greet power of peple in lyvereis wt veends and arraied for werr. 
Item the monday the xv day of Juyn the kyng lyeng at Seint J ohnes beside Smythfeld wt greet peple sent herades and knyghtes to pe seid blak heeth and to bydde pe capitaigne of Kent wt his peple there gadered to wtdrawe theym. And pey' sent answer ageyn that they wer there for the kyngs right and the lord. And they hadde mervelously staked all the feeld aboute theym that no power of horsmen shuld com and override theym. 
Item the same day ageinst even rood toward the same field by the kings comandement the Erle northumberlond the lord Scales and the lord lysle wt a greet ffelawship of speres and bowes and ther was norn bred be an heraude of peple in the seid capitaignes felawship lxM and moo.
  And on the morn the kyng havyng wt him the duke of Excestr the Duk of Bukingham and many Erles lordes knyghtes in substance of all his land wt a mighty power of peple was proposed toward the seid heth to have met wt the seid capitaigne. But be advyse of the kings counseill were sent to entrete wt the capitaigne the lordes whoos names folowen that is to wite, The Cardynall Erchebisshop of York, the Erchebisshop of Caunterbury the duke of Bukingham the Bisshop of Wynchester and the lord Beaumond. And pe capitaigne demeaned him to the lordes in such wyse and called him self and his peple peticioners answeryng to theym pat his comyng to the heth was not to <loo any harme but to have the desires of the comones in the parliament fulfilled.  And the lordes appointed wt hym that all things shuld be redressed and soo the lordes cam ageyn to the kyng and shuld be promyse bring or send to pe same capitaigne by a certen hour assigned from .e king a conclusion of the same appointement. Howe be it because the lordes neuther earn nor sent from the kyng werd to the capitaigne ordeigned and disposed him to kepe the f eld ageinst the king. And pen the king with a mighty power yede toward the seid heth and the seid capitaigne havyng perof witing wt drewe him and all his peple in pe nyght and ffledde and toke wt peym their stakes and ordennance. 
Item on the morn Thursday rood for to pursue after pe seid capitaigne Sir Thomas Stanley and oon Danyell which had greet rule aboute the king and ledde wt peym a greet peple well arraied for defence and as for a vaward rood toward the heeth the Erle Northumberland the lorde Ryvers the Jorde Scales the lorde Grey, Sir Edmond   and William Stafforde and many oper knightes and gentiles wt greet puissance to take the seid capi.taigne. Howe be hit pe seid capitan and his peple lyeng in Busshement met and countred wt pese lordes and slewe the seid Sir Edmund Stafford and Willyam Stafford and hurt moche of their peple. 
Item the same day at xi afore noon the king rode armed purgh Chepe wt his seid dukes, Erles, lordes and knightes wt right a notable and roiall power toward the seid heth and at after noon cam woord of the discomfiture and deth of the seid Staffordes and all pe nyght and on pe morn cam moche peple to strength pe king at Grenewich of lancastr and Chesshir and oper shires.   
Item the ffriday which was the eve of the Translacion of seint Edward the kyng comaunded all his host to moustr upon the seid heth and per was pan a mighty puissance which puissance was assigned by the kings counseill to have ridden into Kent and pursued the seid capitaigne and his peple and so to have destroied kent and taken theym. But the capitaigne and his ffelauship disposed them in such wyse and departed his peple in severall busshements to have recountred wt the lords and their puissaunce. So that the kings shot made than a sodeyn showte and noys upon the seid heth seing distroye we thisetraitours aboute the king which pat pe seid capitaigne hat entended to doo or ever we will doo hit. Whereupon the king graunted their desire and comaunded the lord Say Chamberleyn of Engeland to be take and soo he was arrested in the kings presence and the seid Danyell shuld have been arrested also. But he was in to Kent as is above seid wt a greet felawship to have destroied and hurt pe peple in kent. But whan he herd of pis rule he left his peple and fledde. And the seid lord Say was comyt to the Tour. 
Item on the Satirday folowyng   the king and the lordes wt peir greet power cam agein purgh the citee from Grenewich and went to Westminster. 
Item the Tewesday folowyng the seid capitaigne cam agein to the seid beth wt his felawship which he ded ageinst his ligeaunce all pough his desires wer good and for the well of pe land as he surmitted to have laboured by the which mean he gate the hertes of pe greet part of the comones of the land. 
Item on the Thursday the second day of Jull the seid capitaigne wt his peple whiche wer a full rude peple cam sodenly at iiij after noon into Suthwerk and toke up all the Innes and places.
 Item on the morowe cam a greet ffelawship out of Essex ordeined by the seid capitaigne. And they lay atte mileend wt. out Algate and soo they beseged the citee and than was london brigge drawe and the gates of the citee kept wt men of armes. And oon Robert Horn alderman, Philip Malpas alderman, and John Gest wer in the hevy conceite of the ca pi tan and he and his peple clept theym traytours and extorcioners and wold pat the governors of the citee shuld have put and sent hem oute of the citee to thentent that pey might hadde of hem their desir but they wer escaiped and cowde not be found as god wold. 
Item the same day at after noone the seid capitaigne wt his pep le en tred over london brigge into the citee. And the king and the lordes wer then to Killingworth. And whan he was so entred he dispoyled the seid Philip Malpas place and bore wt him from thens greet goods and recovered into Suthwerk agen wt his peple and made his cryes in the kings name that noon of his peple shuld do ony harme but kepe the peas.
Item on the morowe Saterday cam the Jugges at ix of the clok unto the Guyldhall and .er wer diverse and many enquests charged for the Kyng to enquer of extorcioners and oper evill doers. And in the mean tyme a fore xi of the clok the seid capitaigne cam riding wt his peple on foot from Suthwerk thurgh the citee to powles in a blewe gown of velvet wt sables furred and a strawe hat upon his heed and a sewerd drawen in his hand and retorned agen to london Brigg and into Suthwerk. And at iiij afternoon he and his peple cam agein into Chepe and drank per at a tavern called the Crown and retorned to the IVIildende wer as pe peple of Essex lay and there beheded oon Crowmer and a noper dept William Bailly and cam ageyn in hast into Chepe and thoo ij hedes borne afore him on high poles. And atte Standard in Chepe he hoved and thedir was the lord Say brought from the Guyldhall wher he was be diverse enquestes endited of treson and atte same Standard the capitan ded <loo the said lord Say beheded and dispoylled him of his aray boond his legges wt a roop to an hors and drewe his body on pe pavement purgh a greet part of the citee. 
Item the same night and on the Sonday folowyng pe same capiteigne and his peple appointed to have serched and had diverse worthymen and their goodes of the citee and the same Sonday the capitaigne beheded in Suthwark a gentilman which pe men of Essex delivered to him called Thomas Mayn of Colchestre.  And than the mair and the counceill of the citee laboured that Sonday all the servyse tyme to make and set a rule and ordenance that the seid capiteigne shuld no more entree into the city. And the same night which was the Eve of Seint Thomas the Martyr all the comones of the citee drewe to harneys. And the same night and on the morowe unto iiij of the bell the peple of the citee and the capitaigne and his meyne countred and met to gider on london brigge and in Suthwerk and moch peple were slayn and hurt on either partie. And than the seid capitaigne ffledde and his men departed and soo his power seased and a noon after he was slayn in his defence and pan be heded and his heed set on london brigge and his body brought to the kyngs bench and from thens drawen deed purgh the citee on pe pavement unto the Tyborn and quartred and his quartres sent to diverse places of the land and then wer diverse Oyes determyners hadde in diverse places and specially in kent and moche peple hanged and beheded for the same rysyng and sturing doon by the capitaigne : and in the seid bataill and skyrmissh wer slayn John Sutton alderman and mathewe Gough which was a noble werreour. 
Item the xxj day of July diverse and many of the Sowders that cam and wer dryven out of normandy toke upon them in .e chirch of the Greyfreres wtyn newgate where as pe seid lord Say was worthely buried and his heed leyd by him and his armes set on the pelours aboute drewe and pulled down the same armes and them reversed.  
Item the first day of August the duk of Somerset which was Regent of ffraunce cam from Normandy and brought many pore sawdeours wt hym. 
Item the Sonday ij day of August the sowdeours yeden aboute in divers places and wher that they sygh ony armes eiper of the duk of Suffolk or lord say they pulled hem down and despouilled them and the same day was a quarter of the capitaigne which was set at Deptford strond stolen and borne away.
 Item the Thursday and fryday suyng and soo dayly after cam thurgh Chepe diverse long cartes wt stuff of armor and bedding and houshold as well of Englissh as of norman goodes and men women and children in right pover array pitewus to see dryven out of normandy. 
Item the Sonday the xxiij day of august Cateworth being the maires depute and the shirrefs and certen aldermen rode wt CCC. men well arraied and defensable unto the ffeyr of seint Bartholmewe   to see that the peas and good rule wer kept that the sowdeours shuld doo noo harme to the Chapmen and peple of the contree. ff or the world was so strange that tyme   that noo man might well ride nor goo in noo cooste of pis land wtout a strength of ffelauship but pt he wer robbed. 
Item the same tyme the duk of york lieutenant of Irland landed in Wales and sett in his steed the Erle of Ormond to be his lieutenant per undre the kyng. 
Item on rnichelmas eve the priseners in newgate brake the wardes beneth and gate the high tour. And they cast down stones and ffederes of Irn to hurt peple and made defence more than iiij howres continuelly but atte last they wer discomfited by the mair and shirrefs and chastised. 
Item the ix day of Octobre was such a wellyng and spring of waters both of the see water and the ffressh Ryvers and other springs that the lowe contre in divers places wer over flowe. And the same tyme was every mannes lyvelode extented at what value his yede, and of every xx yerely was leveed to the king xijd.  This yer the morn after Symond day and Jude the mair rood and all the crafts of the citee to Westminster to take his charge. And at even in his comyng to sent Thomas of Akres to doo his offering sowdeours to the nombre of xl men well armed for werr wt gleves and axes made a countenaunce to the mair and alder.men all the wey goyng from powles to seint Thomas wher with the mair being agreved comanded them in pe kings name to leve their wepens bering wtyn the citee. And pey revyling the mair and his officers wold not obey his comaundement wherefor the mair wt his peple set upon hem and toke their wepens from them and sent divers of them to prisen. And on pe morn was made a crye in pe citee that if ony man bare ax Gleyve Swerd or bill pat wer sowdeours or lordes man shuld be taken and put in pryson. And soo the peas was kept and sowdeours avoyded and wer rebuked.   
Item the ffriday the xxx day of Octobr wer drawe doun in divers places of the citie and aboute in pe subarbes pe armes of the seid duk of york a bage of the ffetherlok and the kings armes set up. 
Item upon all halowen eve the seid armes of the duk of york wer set up agein and the mair for keping of the citee and the peas yede dayly wt men harneised defensable for the werr. 
Item the vj day of novembr began the parliament at West.minster. And the comones chosen Sir William Oldhall knight wt pe duk of york speker of the parliament. 
Item the same tyme was ordeyned in diverse places of the citee cheynes to be drawe awthwart the weyes to kepe pe citee sauf: for peple stode in greet dreed and doubt, for the varaunce betwen the lordes. And a cry was made the seid vj day in pe citee in ápe kings name that no maner person shuld speek nor medell of eny mater <loon in pe parliament nor of the lordes.  
Item the same tyme was leveed a greet money to convey and set toward Burdeux   the sowdeours and such peple as wer dryven out of ffraunce and normandy and had not wherof to lyve but robbed and soo to have occupied theym in pe werres for to sauf and kepe pe kings right perof. But pe wer soo many fals meanes and restreintes of the money pat the seid sowdeours shuld have that pey perfor passed not out of pis land and soo becam theves and manquellers in divers places of pis land and the viij day of novembr the comones of pe parliament presented unto the king a bill desiring the seid duk of gloucestr might be proclaimed a trewe knight.  
Item the xxiij day of novembr the seid duk of york wt iijM. men and moo cam riding purgh the citee his sweerd born a fore him and yede to pe parliament and pe king. And on the morn folowyng cam riding purgh the citee the due of norffolk wt a greet peple in Brigandiers and vj clarions a fore him blowyng. 
Item on the morn suyng came the Erle of Warrewyk purgh the citee wt a mighty peple arreied for the werr and pe rnonday the last day of novembr was a marvelous and dredful sturrnyng and noys of the com ones and of lordes men at Vvestminster crieng and seieng to the lordes dooth justice upon the fals trai.tours or lett us be avenged. And upon pe morn which was the first day of Decernbr the lordes men made a saute upon pe duk of Somerset atte Blakfreres in london and ther despoilled moch of his goodes but the mair and the comones of the citee gadered a power to gider and remedied hit a noon and elles had the due be taken or sleyn. 
Item upon the Saterday folowyng the lordes and the Jugges sat atte Guyldhall and the mair keping his estate and the king set upon an Oy determyner for the dispouilling of the seid goodes and the same day the said duk was comyt unto the Tour.  
Item the xviij day of Janyvere peple wer had to the Guyld hall and per paid for pextent of peir liflode vjd for every xxs graunted atte parliament of leicestre : and the same tyme the king rood into kent.  And the erle of Shrovesbury in his name ded execucion upon the peple and the xx day of ffeverer wer set upon london Brigge ix men heedes of kent. 
Item the ffriday folowyng wer set upon the gates of london divers quarters of mtm and soo forth in oper places of this land. 
Item the last day sauf oon the Bisshop of Cauntorbury  was robbed at Lambe hith. Item the vij day of Juyn cam from the king sent to the mair a comyssion for to make a chevisannce of viijM. Ii. by act of parliament ffor which chevisannce to be had the lumbardes Janneys provided perfor at hampton a lone. 
Item the xvj day of July the comones of london were cessed to pay for the rescus of Caleys a xvth and di. And also to pay the iiij part of a xvth to defence a sute at Room for offerings. 
 Item upon seint James even wer set upon london brig v men hedes. 
Item the xij day of Octobre the king being at Wyndesor and the duk of york comyt the Erle Wiltshire and the lord Berkley to ward. Item the viij day of novembre wer take divers scotts and normandes in the north contre. 
Item the xxx day of Janyver oon Sir William Oldhall knight which was chamberleyn to the duk of York was restered agein unto the previlege and seinteuary at Seint Martyn Graunt in loncton which Sir William was take oute of pe place be greet violence be nyght be certeyn lordes few dayes a fore.
  Item the xiij day of ffeveror cam maistr Thomas Kent pat had been in message from the king wt the duk of york and brought such report to the king from the king  pt his highnes was displesed so that the xvj day of the same moneth the king wt his lordes pat is to wyte the dukes of Bukingham Somerset and other (set out ) to ride ageinst the seid duk and toke his journey toward coventre.This yere the moneth of march began the parlement at Reding at which praliament the comones toke a displeisur because they wer restrayned from free eleccion of the knightes of the shir.  And in that parliament wer graunted greet Imposi.cions and charges to be taken of the comones. 
 Item the same parliament was removed to Westminster and te king being at Clarendon indispost sodenly was take and smyten wt a ffransy and his wit and reson wt drawen and pan the parliament was proroged and began a gein at Reding atte Eve of seint michell. 
Item upon seint Bartholmewe day the mair being atte Wresteling at the Clerkenwerk  the priors men of seint Johanes and oon Cayles a mysruly persone toke upon theym to have fered and distressed the mair but howe be hit the mair manfully beet slewe and toke of peym divers and put them to shamefull rebuke.Md. that this yere the comones counceill be the desir and assent of the aldermen left the riding of the mair at his eleccion accustumed and used to Westminster, and yede be barge in water. Item the moneth of Octobr the day of seint Edwarde which is the xiij day therof of the quene beyng at Westminster had a prince. Wherefor the belles rang in every chirch and Te Deum solempny song. And he was christened at Westminster and his godfadres been the Cardinall Erchebisshop of Cauntbury Chan.celler called Kemp and the Duk of Somerset and his Godmoder Duches of Buk. Of whoos birth the peple spake stranngely. And a geinst his birth was begonne a newerk at Westminster a place for a worys. 
Item the chaunnceller deferred the parliament agein unto ffeverer and be gaunne hit agein at Westminster and pan was the duke comyt to the Tour prisoner pat is to wite Somerset.  
Item the ffriday the xxij day of march the seid cardinall died sodenly at iiij in pe morning. 
Item this yer was the Duk of york made protector of Enge.land and the Erle of Salesbury Chaunceller   and they worshipfully ruled and governed.

Md. the xxvj day of Janyver the duk of Somerset straungely conveied out of the Tour be the duke of Bukingham Erle Wiltshire and Lord Roos. 
Wherfor pe Duke of York yave up the kings swerd and noo longer wold occupie protector
. And the xx day of J anyver Goditre a ffrer denounced and shewed at powles cros that the king and the quene had sewed to the Pope and hadde goten unto pe priorie of Seint John Jerusalem in Smythfeld a generall remission and pardon to assoille all poo that had de made any avowe to goo the Stacions of Jerusalem or to Room paieng the iiijth part of the cost that every persone shuld ber in pat journey of such goodes as they hadde. Item the Thursday the xxij day of May the king being at sent albons and greet peple ther wt him assembled purposing toward leicestre and in his company the Duks of Bukingham and Somerset, the Erles of Northumbeland and Wilts pe lordcs Clifford and Roos and oper proclaimed ther the duke of york traitor. Wherupon forthwith the same duke of york and the Erles of Salesbury and Warrewyk entred into the same town wt yeir peple arraied for werr in like wise as the king and his seid peple wer arried: and per the kings Baner displaied the same Duke of york and Erles of Salesburye and Warrewyk slewe the seid duke of Somerset and the Erle North.umbreland and lord Clifford and over threwe the kyngs Baner and preserved his person and toke the duk of Bukingham and lord Roos and the Erle Wilts ffied. And they brought the king pe seco_nd day aftir to the citee of london in greet honour. And the seid duk of york riding on his right side and the Erle of Salesbury on the left side and the Erle of W arrewyk bare his swerd and atte Bisshops paleys at powles the king and the seid duk of york and Erles of Salesbury and Warrewyk and the Erle of Devenshir all the Witsonwyke kept the roialte and sport which bataill the comones trusted brake moch inconvenience and hurt that shuld have fall. 

Item the Wedenesday the ix day of July beganne the parlia.ment at Westminster and the same day cam worde to the king that the sege which was leyde to Berewyk be pe king of Scotts was remeved and he shamefully fledde and moch of his peple slein and distressed in mynes and taken also in vessels upon the water.  

Item the Saterday the xvj day of August humfrey duk of Gloucestr was proclamed in the citee above seid and soo after in other places trewe and feithfull leigeman to the king and a trewe prince to the houre of his deth.This yer was the lord Egremond and his brother comyt to Newgate pe moneth of novembr. And the same moneth the Erle devenshir and the lord Bonevyle fought in the west contrey and moch peple slayn on either side. 
Item the moneth of Decembre the kings resumpcion of his liflode was graunted be the comones of the parliament   and the duke of york made protector agein. And the xxj day of ffeverer (the king ) toke upon him pe rule agein and discharged pe duke of York of protector and the xij day of march the seid parliament was dissolved. 
Item the first day of maij was an Oy Determyner holde atte Guyldhall  and the mair kept the kings estate and upon his right hand satt the Duke of Excestre and on the left hand the duke of Buk the Erles of Salesbury Penbroke and Stafford. And the J ugges on every side next the lordes the king lieng at Bisshopes palice atte powles for he cam the day a fore thedir be barge from Westminster and londed atte blackfreres and ther met hym the mair and aldermen wt a fair peple of men of armes and conveied him to the seid palys. 
Item the v day of maij the seid lordes cam agein to the seid Guyldhall except the Erle Salsbury and the rnair was redy wt his shirrefs and greet peple of men of armes or they cam and kept every wey and gate into the seid hall and wold suffre noon other com in thedir but the lordes and certein of their men. And vj enquests wer per charged for the king to enquere and present all such prisoners as wer mysrulers and of ryot and debate among the peple. And pis was upon a towesday. And the Saterday folowyng were endited of ffelony a sherman dwelling at algate and a noper man of the citee and a Iordes man for a rising and riflyng that was made upon lumbardes and then after they wer hanged. Wherwith the peple sore grucched. 
Item the xix day of September in the nyght tyme wer sett upon the Standard in ffietestrete a fore the duk of york being V than lodged in the Bisshop of Salisbury place certein dogges hedes wt Scriptures in their mouthes balade wise which dogges wer slayn vengeably the same nyght. This yer the ffryday the v day of novembre cam the Erle of Warrewyk unto London. And the same day afore his comyng rode ageinst him to have distressed him the dukes of Excestr and Somerset, the dukes son of Somerset and the Erle Shrews.bury Tresourer and the lords Roos and other wt iiij C. peple. and more as was reported. But thanked be god the seid Erle was perof ware and purveied a remedy ageinst their malice and cam in saufte to the cite of london and they durst not countre wt him for he was named and taken in all places for the moost corageous and manliest knight lyvyng. 
Item the xij day of novembr saterday the lord Egremond which was prisoner at newgate brake prison and stale fro thens to greet jeoparde of the shirref s. And the same moneth the prisoners in newegate brake their wardes and gate into the tour above and threw down stones and all things pat they might fynd upon peple but panked be god they wer soon scomfite.  
Item the xvj day of July seint Osmond was translated at Salesbury wt greet solempnyte. 
Item on lammesday folowyng divers householders and xvj men apprentices of the mercery were attached be writte of pryve seall and comyt to the castell of wyndesore for making a sawte upon the lumbardes. Item the xxvij day of august Sonday the Toun of Sandwich wasrobbed and dispoilled be enemys withoute rebuk ordamage doonto theym. Item upon seint Edwards day the xiij day of Octobre.Sir Robert Chamberleyn knyght and the twoo middeltons yede toward the See out of londonwt V menwaged be the citee to the rescus of Caleis and comfort of pe Erle of Warrewik being thenther for the sauf gard therof. This yer the iij day of novembr the xxxvj yer was a greet assemble and moustres ofmenof the Shires about the citee by the kings comandement. Oo moustre atte long feld betwene harrengey park and Wheston and a nothermoustre at houndes.lowe heth upon Thursday which was awete day and the friday was a nether moustr at seint George feeld in Suthwerk which wasgrevous to the comones. 
Item maistr pecok Bisshop of Chichestr the saterday the iij day of decernbr for sook and left all his points of heresy at lambhith afore the Bisshopes of Caunterbury Wynchestre and Rochestre and be toke him to his open penaunce which was doon themorn after at powles crosse in greet audience and sight of peple and many of his bokes brent ther.  
Item the xxiiij day of March our lady Eve of Annunciacion the king and quene being at Westminster and divers lordes condescended and agreed and ther made a full unyte and peas betwene the dukes of york and somerset and betwene the Erles Warrewyk Salesbury Northumbrelond and lord Clifford: ano the king pardoned all things doon afore aswell at Seint Albons aselles wher and proclamacion made perof the sameday thurgh the citee and therupon on the morn the King and Quene and the lordes yede a procession at powles (which ) was a greet gladnes and comfort to the peple. Item the ix day of maij the seid Erle of Warrewyk be the kings comanndement rood thurgh the citee in enbasset wt a goodly felauship. 
Item the Thursday xvj day of Novembr the King and Quene being at Westminster a man of the kinges hous and a noper. of the seid Erle of Warrewyk fell at bate wtyn the paleys and the Erl es man hurt the kings man. Wherfor the Erle of W arrewyk shuld have be comyt to the Tour but he wisely purveied a remedy therfor. This yer the ffryday the xiij day of aprill   was a greet skirmyssh in ffletestrete betwene peple of the same str.ete and the men of court which contynued in fight and scott betwene theym iij houres. And the belles at seint Brides and seint Donstones range okewards  all the tyme for to have socour of the citee. Howe be hit be cause the king and the lordes lay at Westminster and aboute keping the counseill litle rescue as noon cam oute of the citee soo that the men of ffletestrete had the victory and the men of court were overthrowe and discomfite and divers of them taken and led to prison and many oon after dyed of theym and of ffletestrede deyed V persones and as god wold the Bisshopes and an heroude from the king cam and cesed theym and the crosses and our lordes body born wt prestes reversed betwene theym and elles hadde the men of court been sleyn and their Innes destroied : nevertheles Cliffords Inne was despoilled and the men of court dryven thens and moche harme doon on the Temple. 
Item afterwards in the moneth of maij divers men of ffletestrete and of men of ]awe wer for the same cause arrested and comyt to prison, som to Wyndesore castel and som to other casteles. Item the viij day of J uyn cam riding Jmrgh the citee and fet wt Bisshopes a legat that cam from the pope : at that tyme the Erle of Warrewyk being in kent (and) hadde gadered a greet felauship and a navy of shippes entending to kepe the see and to meet wt the fleet of Spayn and doo som enterprise upon the see in resisting the power and malice of the king and the londes adversaries wheryn that noo lorde of the lond toke the jeoparde nor laboured for the honour and profite of the king and .e londe but only he for the which manhode and his greet pollecy and dedes doyng of worship in fortefieng of Cales and other feates of armes (that) all the cominalte of this lond hadde him in greet laude and chierte for the substaunce and all other landes in lyke wyse : and soo repute and take for as famous a knight as was lyving.  
Item  the begynnyng of July the seid Erle of Warrewyk mette in the See ij Carrykkes of Jean and iij greet Spaynessh shippes which weren arraied and stuffed w¥ men in greet nombr for werr and he scomfited and toke oon carryk and the iij greet shippes and slewe moch peple and brak the mast of the other carryk which escaped. 
Item the same moneth a part of ludgate to wards the sowth was broken and take down wher was found old coigne. 
Item the xx day of Septembr the seid Erle Warrewyk rood thurgh the citee of london wt iij C men well arraied which cam wt hym from Caleis and taried in the cite but oo knight and on the morn rood thurgh Smythfeld to his castell of Warrewyk wher the king and the Quenes meyne hadde doone moch hurt but they aveided and bood not his comyng and than he rood forth from thens toward the Erle of Salesbury his ffader which was in greet jeoparde of lyf to have be destroied by the Quens meyne but or the twoo Eries wer mette to gider the men of the Quene to the nombre of xij M recountred wt pe seid Erle Salesbury havyng iij M persones in his company and pe same Erle and his men overthrewe the Quenes peple and slewe and toke xv knigts and divers Gentiles and after that the same twoo Erles mette to gider and yeven to the Duke of york and Erles of the march and of Rutland and whan they wer assembled they toke a feld to J,entent to shewe unto the kyngs highnes the mischefe of his land for the defaute of good rule because they hadde noon oper mean to com to his presence in saving their lives and they hadde wt them xx M peple and the king l. M.  And the xviij day of Octobr the seid duk and Erles left the ffeld because the king was in the vaward and displaied his baner to fight therfor and in eschewyng of his deth and shedding of greet blode the same duke and Eries ffled and departed that is to wite the seid duk and Erle Rutland his sone into Irland and the Erle of March his son and heir and the seid Eries of Warrewyk and Salesbury to Caleys.
 Item the moneth of novembre was a parliament at Coventry and ther the same lordes and many knightes and Gentiles wer atteint of high treson and perupon proclamed traiters thurgh the londe. 
Item the xxij day of Juyn Sonday C dominical lettre oon J udde a conery of london a breton born, which hadde malicously ymagined and laboured to ordeyn and make all things for werr to pe distruccion of pe seid duke of yorke and all the other lordes and reported them for traitors in greet violence was slayn after his demerit be yond seint albons and so wrechedly as a caitif eended his life.  Item the Wednesday folowyng the seid Erles of March, Warrewik and Salesbre entred and toke the town of sandewich and ther toke oon mountfort capitaigne wt V c. men in lyvere of portcules waged by the kings counseill to goo to Guynes to rescu and fortify the duk of Somerset which kept pat hold be comaundement of the kings counseill to rebuke and in dispite of the seid lordes which letle profited him. And pe seid mountford beheded at Cales. 

Item the next Wednesday folowyng which was the ij day of July the same lordes cam into london wt an ost of foot men of comones of Kent Sussex and Surrey nombred at lx M. which hadde pight their ffeld be side seint George Barre the day afore. And thedir was sent oute of the citee be advise of the mair and vuds  the Recordor and certen aldermen and endrs to entreet the seid lordes that they should not emproche to entre into the cite but take their cours another wey for displaiser of the King and his counseill which hadde yoven by thadvys of his counseill comanndement unto the mair to resist them and had willed and sent unto the mair the lord Scales and other to help the cite to wtstand the seid lordes and put them a bak which lord Scales the comones in no wyse wold agree nor assent to have to such entent for they considered that the cite was mighty and of power wtin hit self to resist the seid lordes and their power, wt out any ayde of lordes yif that the seid lordes hadde otJerwyse entended than the worship and weel of the King and his comenes: which was well understood pat they entended and willed and applied to their power and the honour and good prosperite to be had in every degree howe so ever they wer reported.   
Item the same day after that the seid lordes hadde take them lodgeing atte Grey ffreres wtyn newgate which wer suffred so to doo upon certein pointments that they gave unto seid messangers aforseid sent to them be the seid citee than the seid Ost and feeld brake and they cam .urgh the citee and rested them in the ffeld next unto seint Johanes beyond Smythfeld. áAnd on the friday and Saterday suyng they brake agein and departed in twoo weyes pat is to wite oon wey toward Seint Albons and that other wey toward Ware because that the seid lordes wold mete wt the king and countre wt his ost and lett and stopp pem peir entre into the Isle of Ely, wher pen the kings counceillhadde proposed as was seid to have left the king and for their strength and saufgard ther to have hiden. But in as moche as the kings counseill might not opteynthat purpose they setafeld beside Northampton and thedir cam theseid lordes and their pep le departed in iiij Batailles and per was nombred than of them CIxM.and of the kings OstxxM. Andonthe thursday was Bataill inwhichwerslaininpe kings OsttheDuk of Buk, the Erle Shrovesbury the lord Beaumond thelordeEgremondand many oper gentiles and of oper to the nombre of I. persones and on the other partie not over viij persones and the king preserved and kept than in his magestie Roiall atte plaisur of the lordes.  Item the ix day of decembre the King lieing atte Bisshops.paleys atpowlestheseidduke of york which thatbe auctorite and graunte oftheking and his parliament was assigned and chosen for the weell and rule of pis lond, rode toward York and oper places of pis lond wt strength of peple having the kings full power  toarrertheenemies andtosetOyes Determyners and punysh and redresse rebellious malefactors oppressours extor.c ners and theeves in eny cost haunting and to arreste the malice and surrecion entended be the Quene, the prince, the Dukes of Excestre and of Somerset and of pe Erles of northumberlande, pembroke and Kyme called Tailboys, also (the) Erle of Devenshire the lord Clifferd and the lord Roos and also of the Erle Wilton which was fled into fflaunders and of their power. Which wer sett of affinite and purposed as was reported and seid to have doon greet myschief and hurtes as they afore had used undre counciles and colour of supporting the kings right which proved evermore .contrary as shewed be their werke. 
Item the same day the Erle of Salesbury rode thurgh Chepe not having wt him over a C. persones nor the seid Due over iij (? c.] persones for hit was seid hit shuld not need them to have more multitude be cause the contryes wer advised to resort and strength them in peir journey. And oon called lovelac a Gentilman of Kent folowed them wt greet ordenannce of Gounes and other stuffs of werre. 
Item upon Cristemas day and newyeres day the king yede crouned a procession at powles and on cristemas day the king fested atte Bisshops paleys at london the maior aldremen of this citee and per was greet rialte. And on the morn after newe yeresday cam hevy word and tidings to the king and my lord of Warrewik that the duke of york, the Erle Rutland his sone and the Erle Salesbury wer trayterously and ageinst !awe of armes be taking of Tretys graunted, mordred and slain in the north beside pountfreite in a feld called wakefield   by the fals meanes and power arrered by the duk of Somerset the Erle Northumberland the lorde Roos and the lord Clifford and the lorde N evyll and andrewe trollop and opers. And they made their quarell in colour of that myschevous dede doing and they entended perby to have the king at large surmetting by lettres of deffiance that they sent to the mair and comones of london that the king was enprisoned at london which was fals and be that meanes they dispoilled divers places and robbed and slewe peple be yond the trent shamefull to rite. 
Item the xxviij day of J anyver began the parliament agein and was hold at powles and all the countrees and shyres made greet peple to goo and be avenged upon the seid lordes in the north for their seid cruell dede.  MS. GOUGH LONDON This yere was the Bataill at the brigge.  And this yere the moste parte of Normandy was lost. Also in f everyere the seid xxviij yere the parlement beganne at the blak freres and con.tynued till Ester after but they myght nat accorde. In the mene tyme the duke off Suffolke was arrested and putt in the Toure and grete wacche was made in the Cytee of London all the parle.mente tyme and after Ester the parlement was aiourned to leycestre and there was till after Witsontyde and no thyng pro.ceded. In the mene while the duke of Suffolk as he was in the see goyng over he was taken by a schipp called Nicholas of the toure and his bed smytten of on mayday and the body and the hed cast on the sandes beside dover. And sone after the comons of kent arose wt grete power and com doune to blak heth the xi day of Juyn and there enbaytaled them and picched them round about wt stakis and dichis and there abode vii dayes. And whan the kyng harde this whiles he was at leycestre he made all the lordys gadder all the puysaunce that they couth to go wt hym ayenst the kentysshmen and so they did and com to london and sent dyvers lordys to the blak beth to witt what they ment. And they seid they were petycyoners and besought the kyng that certeyn thyngis that they felt hem agreved wt myght be amended. But the kyng wolde nat graunt them. The Capteyn of them they called John Mortymere : and divers appoyntmentis were taken wt hem but they wolde not holde them wherfor the thursday the xviij day of J uyn the kyng toke all his lords wt all theire peopill in goode array after fourme of werre and rode to blakheth but the ca pteyn and his meyne were goone the night afore but no man knewe whidder. Wherfor certeyn lordys that kept the forward follov,.,ed theire trace. And it hap.pened that Sir U mfrey Stafford Knyght and William Stafford Squyer and an other Squyer wt all theire menny mett wt the kentysshmen about Sevenok and there bikerd wt theym and there were Slayne the said Sir Umfrey and William and many of their men. And on the fryday after dyvers lordys men drewe them gidder on the blak heth and seid that they sawe theire frendys slayne and that they were like to be sleyn also yff they followed the kyng and his traitors. And whanne the duke of Bokyngham hard that he went to the kyng to grenewiche and told hym that his pepill wolde forsaake hym wt out he wolde do execucion on his traitours. Wherefor anon the kyng made the lorde Saye to be arrested and brought to the tower by the duke of Excestre and on the morn after midsomer day   the kyng remeved from Westminster to the castell of kelyngworth: but or he went it was tolde hym the kentysshmen wolde com ageyne. Wherefor he sent for the meier and alder.men and counceill of london and commaunde theym to kepe them out off the cytee. And the morn after seynt peter's day the captein of kent com to blak heth ageyn and there beheded oon pareis a pety Capteyn of hys:   and on the same day there come tythyngs to london that the Bysshop of Salisbury was slayn in Wyltshire. And on the thursday the first day of J uyll the capetayn wt his ost com into Suthwerke and there leged all nyght and the gatis of the brigge were shutt save the wykkett : and that was kept wt harnessed men : but pit by leve men went oute but the kentysshmen wolde nat suffre men to pass the -ferther Stulpis   of the brigge after they were come : and the same day the comons of Essex come doune to mile end to the seid capteyne, and oon the morn after the comons of Iondon wente to yelde hall by cause of a sommaunce made by a commis.sion that was sent from the kyng to certeyn lordys and to the maier and certeyn Justices for to enquire of all thoo persones V were traytours extorcyoners and oppressours of the kynges people but the Justices wolde nott be founde. Where for the comons of london were right wroth. Neverthelesse certeyn Enquestis were called and while the maire satt the comons cryed soore on Ma pas a]dreman and caused that he was dis.charged of his cloke. And Robert Horne an oJ>r aldreman prough the noise of the pepill was there arrested and put in N ewgate: and the same day at V. of the clok at after noone the said capetayn com into london over the brigge and hewe the roopis a sundre that the drawe brigge was bent wt and whan he was at seynt Magnus he made a crie that no man in his host upon peyne of dethe dispoyled no man in london and ayen at leden hall. And forthe wt he went to Malpas place and dispoiled all that was perein and after rode oute to myle ende to the oste of Essex men and from thens ayen into Suthwerk the same nyght: and on the morowe the maier and aldremen and ii Justice satte at yelde hall and charged x. q uestis. Which endited the lorde Say and other of treson and or the maier went to the hall he sent Horne to the capteyn and he raunsoned hym and many other men of the citee: and while the maier was at the hall the capetayn com 'ageyn into london and went to the fflete and from thens to oon Crowmere a Squyer that hadde wedded the lorde Sayes dowghter and had been shireff of kent and doon grete extorcion there as they seid and he beheded hym at white chapell wt oute algate wt an other man that was called bailly and a clerke   and brought the heddys on stakys thourow london and the same day the said capteyn dyned at Cestes place by toure strete and took from hym greete goodys. And the same day at after none the lorde Saye was sent for to the toure by dyverse aldremen and men harnessed and brought to the yelde halle and there was reyned at the barre and after he was dely.vered to the comons   and ledde to the Standard in Chepe and there he was beheded and his bodye drawe thorow london to seynt Thomas Waterng and there hanged and thanne quartred and caried a yen in to Suthwerke.  And on the morn that was Sonday at night the said capteyne made a crye in Suthwerk that every man of the cytee shuld drawe hym in to the cytee: and that all his men shulde drawe to hym in theire best arraye ffor it was tolde hym that the maier and aldremen of london wolde arrere the cytee: and so hit happed that about ix of the clok in the evenyng the lorde Scales and Mathew Gough Squyer that was a noble werreoure wt theire meyny went ayenst the seide capteyn and his men and fought from that tyme till viii of p clokke in the mornyng and much pepill slayne on bothe sidys. And p was Slayn the said Mathew Gough and Sutton aldreman and opr worthy men of the cytee and than the kentysshmen sett ffire on the draw brigg so that men myght not com to theym and anon after viii the erche bisshopp of caunterbury  and the cardenale of york chaunceler of England and other went bytwene and made truse. And on the morn after that was seynt Thomas day of Cauntorbury the seid capteyne voyded to blak.heth wt all his peple and so forth into kent and on thursday the x day of Juyll the said capteyne goods wer taken at Rochester. And on Sunday after Alisander Iden that was Shyreff off kent wt other tooke the said captayne besyde Maydestone and (he) was soore hurt as he was taake so that he died thereof and on Monday next followyng he was brought doun to Suthwerke in a litill carre opyn down to the myddill that men myght see hym: and was lefte in the kyngis bench: and on the wednesday nex followyng he was beheded and quartred, and on thursday he was drawe fro the kyngs benche to Newgate and on fryday the hedde was sett on london brigge and the quarters kept still in Newgate and after they were set up in dyvers partys in kent: and the same yere a litill afore mighelmas the duke of yorke come out off Ireland. This yere on seynt lenardys day after alhalountyde anno domini millesimo CCCC the parlement beganne at Westmynster: and the first day of decembre next follewyng the duke of Somersett was arrested at the blak freris in london and his goodys were dispoyled by the comons for there was heere than grete multitude of people wt the lordis strongly arrayed : and on the morne after that was wedenysday at after noone and before there were made cries in london by the duke of Yorke and the duke of Norfolk that no man shulde rob be nor take noo goode wt in the citee nor wt out upon peyn of deth: and that same day at noone a man was beheded at the Standard in chepe by cause of robbyng and on thursday next follewyng the kyng and all his lordys and theire meyny com rydyng thurgh london in iii ostis rially harnessed and (the citizens standing  ) arrayed on every sides the stret whiles the kyng and his host went through it. Which was oon of the (most  ) glorious sights that ever eny man in these dayes sawe: and the xxviij day of Janyvere next suyng pat was thursday the kyng and certeyne of his lordys wt his Justicis roode in to kent and was there about a moneth and helde sessions there was <loon to dethe xxvj men that were dwellers there and wer endited of treason:  and on tuesday the xxiii day of feveryere next suyng that was seynt Mathies even the kyng come ayens out of kent and roode rially thurgh london: and in the same yere a bout Witsontyde Burdeux was lost and Gaston and Guyen and in harvist after Bayon was lost. This yere on alhalon even the Jorde Egremond was taake by Sir Thomas Nevyle and Sir John Nevile knyghtys by grete bataill in the north contree. Where was many men slayn: and at N ewesyeres tyde after the kyng releved from his siknesse at grenewiche. Wherfor processions wer made at london: and wt in a while after the duke of yorke protectoure was discharged of his office and the Duke of Somerset went out of the Toure at his large : and in lent after the vij day of Marche the erle of Salisbury Chaunceller was discharged off his office   and the Bisshop of Caunterbury called Bourgchier made chaunceler: and the same year the pope sent Bulles in to England of pardon as hole as it was at Rome in the yere of Jubilee   and in Maij the Duke of Yorke the Erle of Sarum and the Erle of Warwyk assembled to theym an armye for to distroye the traitours  a bout the kyng: and the xxi day of may the kyng and the duke of Somerset the Erle of Northumberlond the Jorde Clyfford wt many other lordis knyghts and Squyres rode to seynt albanys purposed toward leycestre to holde a counceill there : and the xxv day off maij that was the thursday afore Witsontyde at seynt albons the seid duke of yorke and other lordis wt theire arm ye tooke f elde and V fought wt the duke off Somersett at none in the toune. Where p duke of Somersett, the Erle of N orthumberlond the lord clyfford were slayn and duryng the bataiil the duke of yorke and the other lordys had the kyng into the abbay and there kept hym unhurt and there the kyng graunted to be ruled by them. This yere died the Erle of Richemond that was brother to the kyng and after that the lorde Egremond brake out of Newgate. Also the same yere the first day of decembre the Counceill beganne at Coventre where was moche murmure among the lordis : but as the toune sadly kept the pees for the yong duke of Somersett was purposed for to affrayed wt the duke of Yorke but the kyng and the lordys made an end therof: and duryng the counceill' the duke of Somersett and Sir John Nevyle knyght son of the Erle of Salisbury had grete visagyng to gidder at london and mustred for to have bykered to gidder in Chepe: but as grace was that they wet nat togidder: and also the meier kept grete wacche to kepe the pees. The same yer frenche.men entred at Sandwiche and took there greett goodes and scope unponysshed.This yere Bisshop Pecok was abioured at Paules Crosse : and the same yere about Candilmas the Duke of Somersett the duke off excestre the lord Egremond and the lorde Clyfford come to the Counceyll wt grete people in forme off werre and they laye in dyverse bishoppis placis wt out temple barre to thentent to have met wt the duke of york and the Erle of Salisbury as they had goon to Westminster by water and the maire of london made grete wacche in the Cytie to kepe the pees : on Chrofte'te.wesday the Erle of Warwikk come from Caleis wt a faire fello.shipp: and a non after that he was come the duke of somersett and the other lordys sent away theire meyne home to theire countreyes   and in lent after the Erle of Northumberlond come to toune the secunde sonday of lent and in the week afore myd.lentt on thursday the duke of Somersett and the Erle of Northumberlond wt theire meyney harnessed and arride in forme of werre went to Westmynster to thentent to have mett with the Erle of Warwyk there but certeyn lordis seyng it went ayenst the Erle of Warwick and mett hym in his barge in thamyse   and so returned him ayen   and so no thyng was <loon blessed be god: and it was said that Warwik seid he wolde to Westmynster on the morow maugre of them all. Where.for the maire made grett wacche to kepe the pees. And the thursday after mydlent the kyng com to Westmynster: and on the morne there was made a generall procession to praie for the pees: and at after none the quene cam to the kyng and the weke follewyng the lordys by the kynge commandment went in tretice betwene the other lordys so that on oure ladys Even in lent pt was friday they were made accorded at Westminster before the kyng and eche tooke other by the hande and so cam forthe togidder arme in arme as frendys and at after noone the kyng sent writyng to the maier and commanded hym to pro.clayme pourgh the Cytee how the lordis were accorded and on the morn that was oure lady day the kyng and pe quene and all the lordys went on procession at powlis solemply thankyng god that the lordis were accorded: and there was seen that day on off the grettest multitude of people that day that ever was seen irt powlis: and on thursday in the Witson weke the duke of Somersett wyth antony Ryvers and other iiij kept Justices   afore the kyng and the quene in the toure ayenst iij Squyres of the quenys: and on Sonday after they kept newe Justices   at Grenewiche: and on the moneday after Trinitee Sonday certeyn shippes of Caleys apperteynyng unto the Erle of Warwyk mett in the see wt the Spannysshe shippes and there bikered wt them and tooke vi Spannysshe Shippes full of marchaundises: and other vi were drowned about Boleyn and the remenaunt of the Spaynayardis fled to the nombre of xvi Shippes which were soone bett and moche of theire people slayne and of Englisshe.men were slayn about C. and many hurt.  The same yere the Janewayes tooke Starmyns Shipp of Bristow and other wt hym pt hadde been in hethenesse. Wherfor the J anewayes that were in london were arrested and putt in the fleete and paid for the ha.rme viM markes. 
And the Thursday after the Erle of Marche and the Erle of Warwik come to london wyth a grett puisshaunce and on Sonday after all the host mustred in Seynt J ohannis ffelde and there was redde among theym certeyne articles and poyntys that kyng harry the vi hadde offended in ayenst the realme. And then it was demanded of the people whether the said harry were worthy to regne still and the peopill cried nay: and than was axed iff they wolde have the Erle of Marche to theire kyng and they cryed yee: and then certeyne capitaynes went to the Erle of Marches place at Baynardis Castell and muche people wt hem and tolde hym that the people had chosen hym for kyng and he thanked theym and by the advyce of the bisshop of Countorbury the Bisshop of Excestre and the Erle of W arwik wt other graunt it to take it upon hym:  and on tewesday after made cryes that all maner people shulde mete him on the morn that was the iiij day of Marche at powles at ix of the clokk and so they did: and thidder come the Erle of Marche wt the lordis in goodly array and there went on procession purgh the toune wt thee letanye : and after procession <loon the bisshop of Excestre Chaunceler made a sermon: and at the Ende of the Sermon he declared the Erle of Marches right and title to the crowne and demaunded the people yff they wolde have hym to her kyng as his right axed and they cryed yee: than all the people were prayed to goo wt hym to Westmynster to see hym taake his possession and so the people did : and than the Erle of Marche wt the lordis spirituell and temporell roode thidder and whan he come at the halle he alighted and went in and so up to the chauncery and there he was Sworn afore the bisshop of Caunter.bury and the Chanceller off Englond and the lordis that he shulde truly and justly kepe the realme and the lawes there of rnaynteyne as a true and a Juste kyng: and than they did on hym kynges roobis and the cappe of Estate and than (he  ) went and satt in the See as kyng: and than it was axed of the people yff they wolde have hym to kyng and hym rnaynteyne supporte and obeye as true kyng and the people cried yee: and then he wente thorowe the paleys to Westmynster chirche: and the abbot wt procession boode hym in the chirche hawe wt Seynt Edwardis Septure and there tooke it hyrn and so went into the Chirche and offered at the high awter wt grett Solempnitee and after at Seynt Edwardis shryne: and than cam doune into the Quere and satt there in the see whiles Te Deum was songe solemply: and thanne   went into the paleys ayene and chaunged his array: and after com doune by water and went to poules to the paleys and there logged and dyned. And the maier and the aldremen and comons in Westminster hall besought thee kyng to be goode and gracious lorde to the cytee and to the fraunchies theroff that they rnyght enjoye hem as they did afore his tyme: and theere he graunted hem goode lordeship and all theire fraunchises as they were graunted them and promitted to afferrne them and charged the maier aldrernen and comons to kepe the cytee to his behoff e and honoure. 
And the said kyng Edward the iiijth beganne his reigne the seid wedenysday that was the iiijth day off marche the yere of our lorde god MCCClXi.This yere on Wedenesday the iiij day of Novembre began the parlement at Westmynster and on the morne after that was Thursday died John duke of Norfolk a noble prince that had holpon Kyng Edward gretly to his right   on whom god have mercy: and on all halowen day at Westmynster the kyng made his yong brother Richard duke of Gloucestre the lorde bourgchier Erle of Essex and the lorde fawconbrigge Erle of Kent: and the kyng kepte his Cristmas at Grenewiche and his moder at Eltham and theire was the yeres mynde kepte of the duke off yorke rially on New Veres even the masse and on the morow after xii day the kyng remeved toward Cauntorbury and so forthe to Sandwiche   bicause it was seid that Shipmen had caried away Som of the Shippes: and the xiith day off feveryere the Erle off Oxenford and the lorde awbrey vere his son Sir Thomas Tudenham William Terell and other were brought into the toure of london ffor treason: and on Satirday the xxth day of the seid moneth the said lorde aubrey was drawe from West.mynster to the tower hill and there beheded. And on the xxiij day of feveryere next after that was Tuesday and seynt Mathewes evyn Sir Thomas Todenham Tyrell and Mongomery were be.heded atte Towre Hill: and on friday next ffolewyng the Erle of Oxen ford was led on his fete fro W estrnynster to towre hill and there beheded at afternone: and is buried at frere Austyns and the last daye off J uyll the Castell of Anwik was yolden to the Jorde hastyngis by poyntment: and the Erle off Kent with bisshoppes went in to Breteyn and pere gate the Ile of Conkett and patised it to Englond in the begynnyng of Septembre. This yere after alhalontyde there was proclamacions made in london by pe kyngis commanndement that the kyng had par.doned all the N orthynmen for their Rysyng and all other as well for the deth of the lorde Ryvers as other : and afterward there was moche a doo for a rysyng that was made in lincoln Shire: and the kyng ordeyned him to goo thidder ward. And in feveryere the Erle off Warwik com to london ayene and or he cam there was moche a doo for billes that were sett up -in divers places in london of the duke of Claraunce and him: and on Shrofe Sonday the kyng hadd purposed to have goone North.ward and the same day the duke off Claraunce com to toune: and therefor the kyng taried as it was seid till Shroftywesday or he yede: and that same day at iij after noone the kyng come from Westmynster to Baynardis Castell in a barge and his lordys with hym: and so they com to poules and the kyng off red and thanne went to horsebak and Roode to Ware the same nyght and wt hym the Erle of arondell and percy that was newe made Erle of Northumbrlond and the Jorde hastyngis   and other: and at pat tyme the Erle of Warwik was at Warwik and had reysed moche people . . .  Also on ffryday the xxxth day off J anyvere the seid yere satt in the seid Guyhalde on a determyner the maier the duke f Bukkyngham the Jorde markes the Erle off Aronndell the Erle off Derby the Erle of Suffolke the Erle of Essex the Erle of Surrey the Erle of Vrmond the Jorde off Burgeveny the Jorde Hhastyngs pe lorde Daubeney the Jorde Denham Sir Reynolde Braye Sir Thomas Lovell dyverse J uges Barons and aldremen and there were brought afore theym the deane off poulis the provyncyall off the blak fryers  the prior off Jangley Sir Symond wtmomford Sir Robert Ratclyff  William Daubeney and his servant Cresseno of Clementes ynne and a dowcheman all whiche persones was endyted off Treson and confessed the same treson save oonly Sir Robert Ratclyff: and there were juged to be drawen from the toure of london to tyborne the dene of poulys the provyncyall of the blak ffryers the prior of langeley and there to be hanged and quartred. 
Also on Saterday the last day off J anyvere the seid yere sat in the seid guyhall on determynyng the maier and all the seid lordys and there were brought befoore them Sir Thomas Twhaytes Sir Symond Momforde Sir Robert Ratclyff Docto(r) Sutton master Lassy master Thomas Warde Doctor Suttones brother master William Daubeny Cressno of Clementes J nne a maryner   and a dowcheman and there were J uged the same day to be drawen from Newgate to the tour hill and there to be heded and quartred Doctor Sutton master dawbeney Cresno of Clemente Jnne a maryner a man off yorke and a dowcheman and there was endyted off consperysy Sir Thomas Twhaytes. 
Also on Wedenesday the iiijth day off ffeveryere were drawen from Newesgate to the towere hill and there beheded Sir Symon Momford Sir Robert Ratclyff master William Daubeney and there were that had ther charters Cresno and a man of yorke. 
Also the same day was apeched the archebisshop of yorke and cam before the lordys in the starre Chambre and there was suerty ffor hym body for body and goodes for goodes my Jorde of Cauntorbury Chanceler of Englond. 
Also on thursday the vth day of ffeveryere was drawen ffrom Newegate to tiborne and there hanged and quartred the maryner and a fflemmyng. 
Also the same day satt in the yelde hall on a determynacioner the maier dyverse J ugis the kynges solysitor and the Recordor and there were dyverse enquestes charged and there was dampned oon pety John  to be drawen and hanged at Tyborne. 
Also on ffryday the vith day of feveryere in the kynges benche satt the chieff Juge, the chieff J uge of the com on place Sir guy ffarefaxx the chieff Baton off the Chekker wt other J ugis the duke off Bokyngham the lorde markes the Erle off Arundell the Erle of Essex the Erle off Surrey the Erle of Suffolk the Erle of Northumberlond the lorde Hastynges the Iorde Stewarde the Jorde Denham the lorde burgeveny the Jorde grey cotenor I the lorde vVellys Sir Reynold Bray and Sir Thomas lovell and there was indyted of treson Sir Williom Stanley lorde chamberleyn and there reyned. 
Also on Saterday the viith day off ffeveryere all the seid Jugis and lordys satt in the kyngis benche and there was reyned Sir William Stanley lorde Chamberleyne and by a quest was dampned and had jugement by the chieff jugge to be drawen from the rounde hous at Westminster to the towre hill and there hanged and after his hed smytten of and his bowells brent. 
  Also the xvj day off feveryere moneday was Sir William Stanley Lorde Chamberleyne pardoned off the kyng off hangyng and drawyng and the seid day bytwene xj and xij at noone was he ledde from the toure of london to the toure hyll and there his hed smytten off and is beryed at Saint Donnstones  in the . . . MS. WESTERN  (A CHRONICLE OF LYNN).   1477 Thomas Layttene maior This man deceassed in his yere and water conye sucseded his rome: also in this yere in the sete of trodent the J ewes slewe a chyld in derysion of ye passion of Chryst and for the wch act they suff ared great punyshment :   also georg deweke clarens yongr brother to the Kynge was droned in a boot of mamsey. 
  1478 Thomas Thorsbe maior 
In this yere was ther grete mortalytye her in England.   1479 John Borbave maior   In this yere Mahomet the torke besydged the Rode but lost his labr. 
   1480 William Marche maior 
  1481 William Marche maior In this yere the Skots begane to store and the deweke of glossytr was sent to them but he retorned wth out battell. 
   1482 Thorsbe maior
 In this yere Kyng Edward (died ) the th died the  day of apryll and lefte behend hym z sons Edward the prynce and Rychard pe deweke of Yorke wth  dawghters.
   1483 Robarte Pyllye maior I,n this yere the xi day of aprell Edward the vth begayne his rene being of the adge of a xi yers and never was crowned but most shameff ully murdred at the comandement of his ow uncle rychard the  who in Joune next after began to reyne. 
  1484 Thomas W ryght maior In this yere the deweke of buckyngam was beheded. 1485 John Tyllye maior In this yere was bosworth fyld  wherin kynge Rychard was over throune in the  yere of his Reyne by henery the Erle of Rychmond who was afterward Kyng by the nam of Kyng henry the sevethe. In this yer the 22 of August henery the th begane his rene. 
  1486 Rycharde Godwyne maior In this yere King henery the ih maryed Elyzabeth the eldest dowghter of Edward the th   and by meanes wherof the tow houses of yorke and longcaster was set at one wr as pe wer enymys. 
  1487 Robarte Pylly maior In this yere the quen was maryed. 
  1488 John Tegoe maior In this yer was a grete battell betwyne the K yng and other nobles by reson pt a pryst called rychard symond [who] conveyed awaye a yong chyld into yerlande saying to the nobles that he was sonne to the deweke clarons.  
  1489 John Gryndell maior 
  1490 John Gryndell maior In this yere the Kyng was at Walsyngame: also ther was a taxt of the tent penye of mens lands by means wherof the comons rose and slewe the erle of northumberlond   ffor wch cawse   ther captene wth divers others was hanged. And in this yere Kyng henrye the VIIIth was borne. 
   1491 Robarte Podyche maior In. this yere the sowthe ylle of sant margefs church was ffynyshed:  also in this yere the kyng of Scots was slain bye the nobles of this ryelm and Jamy his sone was kyng in his stead. 
   1492 Thomas Wryghte maior In this yere was a grete ffray in lyne betwyne the towen and the undr stryf  and the excheker wth ther men. In this yere also was fray in the cete of London upon the esterlynes  and the kyng aryved in ffrance and a peace was taken and a tribet granted wch was xxv M. crownes by yere.   1493 Edmunde Howsey   maior In this yer was wheat at vid a bushell and bay salt was for 3 pence ob. a bushell.
   1494 Wyllam Amfflays maior In this yer begane the ffrence pockes  and whyt heryng was sold for 3 4 the barrell. 
  1495 Wyllm Aumfflays maior 
  1496 John Palmer maior In this yer cam henrye the Vllth to lyne wth the quen the yong prynce and the K yngs mother and lodged at the fryer awgustyne. In this year also was blace heth ffyld:  and the   day of June a stone of a gret begnes ff ell in ltely and cam out of the are and brake in  pesses, yt was as thoughe yt had come out of the are in ffyre. 
1497 Robarte Trewe maior 
1498 John Tay Iler maior 
1499 Thomas  Daye rnaior In this yere parkyne warbeke sooffred and shortly after the erle of warwyke.
 1500 Androwe W ollse maior In this year was ther gret pestelence in London:  and margaret the Kyngs dowghter was maryed to J a mys pe kyng of skotts and ffarna.do maryed his dowghter [and] Kataryne to prince artter.
  1501 Symone Baxster maior In this yere dyed prynse arthor.
  1502 Thomas Thorsby mair 
In this yer dyed elyzabethe the quen in the tower in chyld bed.
1503 John Pall mar maior In this yere ther was much hurt in London bye ffyre.
1504 Wyllyam Trewe maior 
1505 Wyllyam Grarye  maior In this yere the wather coke of [ sant margets]  powels blawen dowen: and the deweke of borgony by stres of wather was dryven into the west countrye. 
1506 Androwe Wollsye maior 
In this yere sant margets church of lyne was suspended and they chrystened in the charnell:  and in this yere a great part of Norwyche was breilt. 1507  Robarte J arvyte maior 
1508 Jhon Bordye maior In this yere at Constantynople was great erthequake so that husses and towres were over throune withe the torkes pallas wherbye manye people wer destroyed and the great torke was constraayned to flye.  In this yere the 21 day of apryell Kynge henry the VIIth died and in the th 24th yere of his reyne. In this yere also kyng henarye the VIIIth begane his reyne the 22 of apryll in anno 1508 .  
 1509 John Gryndelle maior In this yere begane the sute betwyne Lyne and Cambredge for the toll  of Sturbyche ffare. This yere also was beheded both hempsen and dudlay:  and the kynge maryed lady katheryne having a dyspention ffrom leo the byshop of rome. 1510 Thomas Wyte maiorIn this yere henry the first sone of kynge henery the VIII was borne on new years daye.
   1511   Thomas Wyte maior In this yere lord hawarde towoke Androo bartton and z ffare shyppes. 
   1512 John Davye maior In this yere the paryshoners of St. James parysh contended against ther pryst ffor sarten injores and ffor sellyng of the tryes in the churche yarde. In this yere also the lord haword lord admyrall was slayne info. v breten. The regent of England and the karyck of ff ranee was brent. Sr thomas knevyt was capten in the regent and had  men wythe hym and Sr pers morgyn capten in the karyk wrin was  men. In this yer also the kyng of skots entred in to yngland and was slayne wth xij erles be the erle of Surrey. 
1513 Rycharde Bowsher maior In this yere Sr (John)  Walles bornyd dyvers towenes and vylleges in Normandye. 1514 Robert Some maior In this yere was a peace taken and concluded betwen yngland and ffrance and the ffrence Kynge maryed the lady mary the kyngs syster of yngland wch ffrence kyng emedyatly died and his wyffe was ffatched agayne by the deweke of Suffolke:   also in this yere Rychard Hunne was horned in the lollard towere.
  1515 Thomas Gryndell maior In this yer was there a woman horned in the market plase ffor kyllyng of her husband. 
 1516 Robarte Amfloes maior In this yere was sant stevens flud: such a frost ensued that men wth carts myght pass betwyne westmynster and lambethe. This yere in fabruary was borne at grynwyche the lady marye the kyngs dowghter. In this yer on may day wch is called the yle may day was there an insurrection in london of yonge persons agaynst alyans of the wch divers were put to execution and the resudewe cam to Westmynster wth halters about ther neks and were pardoned : and the  - of may the quen of skots retorned into skotland agayne.   1517 Thomas Layghten maior In this yere many died of the swete.  Tornoy was give over into the ffrench kyngs hand;   the terme was adiumed to Oxford and agayne to London. 
   1518 William Castell maior In this yere leutor wrot to leo the byshop of rome consarnyng pardons and other matters of relygyon for wch cawse he was proclarned [trator]  heretycke but by the mantynance of the duke of Saxton he preched and wrot styli agaynst the pope.¥
  1519 Robarte Jarvyte maior In this yere the carnoll tho mas wolsye was at lyne.  
  1520 Thomas Myller maior In this yere begane the sut betwyne lyne and the bishop of norwyche ffor the lyberty of lyne. 
  1521 Thomas Myller (maior)  governer In this yer was the deweke of bukyngam beheded the   day of may;  the emperor charles cam to london. 1522 Thomas Myller governor
In this here the deweke of Albany began to enter this land but by heryng the erll of Shrosberye was comynge to fyght wth hym then a pease was taken ffor vi monythes:   a great pestilence in Rom this yere ther died   thousand:   and the gret turke besedged the Roods and took yt on chrystmes day.  
   1523 Thomas Myller governor In this yere a peace concluded betwyne yngland and skott.land : in this yere the towne of lyne had ther libertye agayne restored and the sword borne befor the mare and the towen was called kyngs lyne. 
  1524 John Gryndell maior This yere a pease concluded betwyne yngland and ffrance. The coyne, was inhanssed:  the Kynges maiestye was allmoste drowened by leapynge over a dych after his hauke.    1525 Thomas Layghten maior In this yer was ther a grete insurrection in Jarmenye,  , people slayne wt h in  monthes.   In this yere begane the dewlyshe doctryne of the anabaptys.. 
  1526  Chrystover Brodhauke mar.  In this yere was grete murmerynge in Suffolke but yt was ffor pament of surten mony wrby ther arose in Suff(olk) , men but wer apesed by the deweke. In this yere docter barnys fo. v bare a ffagott at poweles cros  and gret dethe was in lopdon.  
 1527 Robarte Some maior 
In this yere cam to lyne the quen of ffrance the deweke of Suffolk wyf and loged at mr comes plase.   1528 John Waters maior In this yere was sene thre sonnes in the are: corne was very dere: the swetynge sycnes reyned in sondry plasses.
    1529 Thomas Myller maior In this yere the cardnole was deposed of and from the chans.lershipe of ynglande.  
  1530 Rychard Bowsher mare In this yere the cardenall dyed and was boylled in Smythefyld ff or poyssenynge. Tyndall testament was borned. 
  1531 John Power maior In this yer was ther dyvers prechynge one agaynst the other for the K yngs maryedge.     1532 Robarte Awmfler maior In thes yer was the Kynge devorssed from hys wyf and maryed anne bollone : and in this yer was borne at grynwycheLady Elyzabethe.
   1533 Robarte Parmyter mare In this yer was wyllim trase taken out of his grave and bornd who died thre yeres before  [of norffolke].  In this yere the beshop of Rome corssed the Kynge and the fo. v realme becase of his [mary]  devorsment: the holly made of kent wth others soffored deathe ;  the beshop of rome was abbollyshed this relm. 
 1534 Robart Segreve maior In this yere a deuche man was borned in the market please for eressye as the say:  in this yere John frythe was horned in Smythfyld :  this yere the fyrst frutts and tents was granted to the Kynge:   the byshop of Rochester and Sr thomas more was beheded. 
  1535 Thomas Waters Maior In this yere the (lady)  Katheryne ended her lyffe: and willyam tyndall pe larned man was borned in Brabon. 
  1536 Thomas Layghten maior In this yere was ther a comotion in lyncolne shyre and yorke.sher the lynconshyre men beynge but   M. wer fyrst staid the yorkesher men being  M. had ther badges of the V wonds the fygurs of the Sacrement and Ihs wrytten in the medel and at what tyme the batoll shold have bene ffought the nyght before a water that was betwyne them arose that nether of the partyse cold com to other and then a pease was concluded betwyne them. In this yere one william chysborow and a whyght ffryere was hanged drawen and quarterd the next day after corpus christi daye. In this yere begane the mart at Lyne holdynge  yers   times a yere that ys to say fyrste is at the assention of our lady and the other is at the puryfycation. 
  1537 Wyllyam hawlle maior In this (yere)   prince Edward was borne on St. edwards even and his mother Queen Jane died ymmedyatly after in chyld bed. In this yere the lord darcye the lord hussye wth Sir thomas ersye suffred ffor hygh tresson. ffryer fforest was hanged and afterward borned for treson and erese.  1538 Rychard Bowsher maior In this yere was the ffrears supressed at lyne on myghellmes day  and pylgrymes and  Idolytrye forbyden. Abbays sup.pressed and dyvers gentollmen put to deathe for treasson. 1539 Wyllyam Hawlle tayler mayor In this yeare the gret Onell invaded the Inglyshe pale  and the maryage of King henry the VIIIth and the lady ane of cleve was concluded. 1540 Edwarde Newton and Allyn Baker maiors
In this year the 2 marts at lyne was put dowen. And in thys (year) ther was a gret drought that one bushell of come wold hen geven ff or the other gryndinge in many plasses. Barnes cherome and gared priests rekanted  and the lord cromwell beheded. And Kynge henrye the VIII devorssed ffrom the lad ye anne of cl eve.    
1541 Henrye Dewplacke Maior In this year the countes of Sallysberye was beheded  and   of the gard hanged:  the lord darsse for murder and spoyll suffred: 'J the lord lenerd graye apprehended   the lady kateryne ha word attaynted    and the'kynge of skottes wch promyssed kynge henry to mete hyme at yorke cam not ther but dessembled.   1542 Wyllyam Kenete maior In this year the gret onelle submytted hym self to the Kynge:   also a loan of mony granted and paid: also on saynt mychelmes day the skots was over throwen:  also 'harowld of yngland was slayne by rebels: the comon people was constrayned for rydynge the byble : . dyvers lerned men rekanted. London wth the plage was sore vexed :  the kynge was maryed to the lady kateryne latymer:  the taker of depe and the mynyon had a great fyght: being both rnery they departed. 